The Excellent Path to Enlightenment

An Aspiration Towards the Mahāyāna Mind Training

by Ga Rabjampa Kunga Yeshe

Homage to the guru!

Always loving towards beings and never untimely,Victorious buddhas and your heirs—think of me,
I pray!Grant your blessings, so that these, my heartfelt aspirationsTo train and follow
in your footsteps, may come true!

With compassion for all beings, limitless in number,And devotion born of faith and understanding,May
I take refuge, from now until enlightenment,With trust in the teacher and the Three
Jewels!

This human form, so difficult to find, will not last long,No matter where I’m reborn, there’ll
be no chance of happiness,And positive and negative actions bear their fruits unfailingly—Seeing
this, may I devote myself wholeheartedly to the sacred Dharma!

As it is a medicine to soothe all the pains of saṃsāric existence,A supreme treasure bringing
benefit and happiness to all,And a gentle mother nurturing the buddhas and their heirs,May
my confidence in bodhicitta remain forever steadfast!

Never proud, no matter how prosperous I become,And never despondent, even in dire misfortune,This
vast strength of mind possessed by bodhisattvas—May it take birth definitively in my
heart!

As it is the very essence of all the teachings,The single path followed by all of Buddha’s heirs,And
the guide and teacher to all who are enlightened:May bodhicitta arise swiftly in
my own mind!

These dream-like phenomena, delusory perceptions of my mind,Are unborn and beyond all conceptual
elaboration.Seeing this, during the post-meditation, through illusion-like concentration,May
I benefit these beings, figments of my own delusion, on a vast scale!

When seeing my companions, so kind and helpful to me in the past,Sinking now in this vast ocean
of suffering,May my mind be filled with love and tenderness for all,Like a mother watching
helplessly as her beloved child is swept away and drowned!

May I take upon myself the harms and sufferings of beings,My own mothers and fathers from lives
without beginning,And may I give away my own happiness and virtue to others,So that this
noble attitude, taught to be supreme, is ignited in my mind!

May whatever appears, the basis of afflictions like ignorance, desire and anger,Whether it be
friendly, hostile or neutral,Become a support for bodhicitta,Like fuel heaped upon a blazing
fire!

As it is the cause of all the afflictions that bind us in saṃsāra,The source of negative karma
and the various forms of suffering,And a demon that obstructs us on the path to enlightenment:May
I firmly uproot all forms of self-cherishing!

Like perceiving nectar as pus, as a result of karma,The faults I see in others reflect my own
impure perception.Knowing this, may I be respectful to all other beings,Sources of ocean-like
qualities of happiness and positivity!

Suffering, disdain, slander, and the like,Whatever unwanted circumstances befall me,By seeing
them as a support for the bodhisattva training,May I accept them all with a mind of perfect
joy!

The bounties of this world are like the stuff of dreams—However many I acquire, may I never
be attached to them,And, while seeing them as a means of benefitting others,May I not be afraid
to sacrifice even life and limb!

Should even my oldest and dearest of friendsTurn against me and regard me as an enemy,May I
respond only with love and strive to bring aboutTheir benefit and happiness, now and in the
future!

Should hordes of demons craving flesh and bloodDescend upon me, intent on devouring this illusory
body,Still may I not succumb to thoughts of self-cherishing,But, with love, strive to
bring them only benefit!

Seeing that these various phenomena do not ever partFrom mind’s nature, which is, and always
has been, peaceful,May deluded perceptions of adversity, like the moon’s reflection,Lead
me to a clear realization of the actual nature of reality!

Seeing all harm-doers as spiritual friends,All suffering as adornments for the mind,And all
adversity as incitement to virtue,May unfavorable circumstances be transformed into the path!


Knowing that hankering after my own happiness is the true enemy,May ordinary adversaries become
supports for awakening!And, seeing sickness as a means of purifying negativity,May unfavorable
circumstances be transformed into the path!

Seeing evil omens as circumstances for attracting prosperity,Evil spirits as supports for gaining
accomplishment,And evil companions as a way of deepening my understanding of mistaken
practice,May adverse circumstances be transformed into the path!

Knowing what to take up and avoid, I shall accumulate and purify correctly,Pleasing the guardians
will bring victory over obstacles and māras,And through skill in means, all types of
hindrance will become supports—May I take to heart the four kinds of practice!

With sheer delight, may I don the armor of commitment[1]And train the mind in the Dharma that
subdues self-clinging!With the support of wholesome methods and aspirations,May my practice
of Dharma equal the length of my life!

With the devotion of constantly recalling the guru,And perfect familiarity with bodhicitta,
absolute and relative,While never straying from the Dharma that is profound and vast,May I
have the merit to face death in this way!

Even though I be assailed by humans and non-human demons,Tormented by a disturbance in the body’s
elements,Or afflicted by intense destructive emotions,May supreme bodhicitta never diminish!


Even as the bardos’s horrors unfold within my deluded perception,Or as I enter a future mother’s
womb, or later, during other lifetimes,May I never forget, even for so much as a single
instant,The essence of Dharma—bodhicitta, precious and sublime!

The victorious buddhas and their heirs, the spiritual friends,Proclaim this excellent, genuine
path to their circles of disciples.Serving such teachers throughout all my lives to come,And
embracing this instruction, may I benefit others!

By subduing self-clinging, may whatever I do become the Dharma!Banishing hope and fear, may
whatever happens be supportive!By mastering the altruistic attitude, even if I should suffer,May
it only contribute to others’ happiness and joy!

Never contaminated by the poison of clinging to beliefsNor bound by compassion that is limited
and partial,May precious bodhicitta, uniting relative and absolute,Dispel all the ills
of both existence and quiescence!

Even if my actions of body and speech are ordinary,May I never be separated from the mind of
bodhicitta!Even without a routine of contrived virtuous actions,Through motivation’s power,
may I gather merit in abundance!

Though I dedicate my body, life, possessions and merits of past, present and future,Each and
every day for the good of all who live,May hopes of gaining some benefit or happiness for
myself in returnNever occur to me, even for an instant!

To take defeat upon myself and give the victory to others,To keep the lowest place and respect
each and every being,To offer only benefit in response to any harm that’s done:This is
the discipline of the bodhisattvas—may I embrace it!

Respecting the teachers and taking to heart all that they say,Bringing together all the teachings
in a single practice,And abandoning hope and fear, may I always, for the sake of others,Clothe
myself in the armor of enthusiastic diligence!

If it should prove to be a cause of harm to others,May I abandon like chaff[2] even the bliss
of liberation!If it should benefit others, may I be born in the lower realms,Entering happily,
as if strolling into a pleasant garden!

Guarding the three trainings as though they were my very eyes,May my body, speech and mind never
waver from the Dharma,And may I dedicate all my merits of the past, present, and future,Purely,
free from the three concepts of subject, object, and action!

With a mind filled with joy, may I enterThe ocean of conduct, vast and limitless in depth,The
mine of many million jewels of virtue and goodness,And the source of powerful accumulation![3]


When oppressed by the burden of all manner of sufferings,Through this particular remedy, out
of all the countless skilful methods,May I bring benefit and happiness to all beings without
exception,And gain great powers of samādhi meditation!

Enlightened vision and actions are like a vast ocean, impossible to fathom;So, having gathered
within the great lake-like vessel of my own mindRivers of treasure-like qualities drawn
from an infinite sea of victorious buddhas,May my own actions be indistinguishable from the
ocean of enlightened activity!

This prayer, incorporating the uncommon terminology of the Mahāyāna mind-training teachings
in verses of aspiration, was composed by the one who has a heartfelt trust in this teaching,
Lodrö Shenpen Dawa.[4] May it be virtuous and auspicious!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2013. Revised and updated for Lotsawa House, 2021.