The Finest Jewel
An Aspiration Prayer of Mahāyāna Mind Training
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

namo guru
Namo guru!
tönpa nyammé shakyé gyalpo dang
Incomparable teacher, king of the Śākyas,
chenrezik dang jetsün drolmé shyab
Avalokiteśvara and reverend noble Tārā,
trowö gyalpo mi yo gönpo dang
Lord Acala, sovereign of the wrathful ones,
lha chik jowo chenpo yabsé nam
Sole deity, great Jowo Atiśa and your heirs—
mi ngen dak gi tsuk gi gyen shyuk né
Remain upon my, an evil person's, crown,
go sum chö dang drepar jingyi lob
And inspire me to mix my body, speech and mind with Dharma.

ten shyi püntsok dal dang jorpa di
This perfect support with its freedoms and advantages
dü gya len chik tobpa daré tsam
Presents a one-in-a-hundred-lifetimes opportunity.
mitsé södal kyalwé melong yi
With the mirror of this human life of leisure
dü kyi ma lü daré dön yö du
Unspoilt by demonic forces, may I make it meaningful
dampé chö la bepa drakpö tsön
And exert myself with intense effort in the sacred Dharma.

sang dang jikten chimé nangwa nyi
I cannot be certain which will come first:
ngön la gang jung ngepar cha mi tsal
Tomorrow or the appearances of the next life.
yün ring döpé drab chü ngenpa di
And since this wicked habit of procrastination
ten dé dünma lakpar jepé na
Will only ruin my chances of lasting happiness,
nyurwa nyurwar chö la bepar shok
May I apply myself to the Dharma ever so swiftly.

tsöndrü nak kyi mé chen rab bar né
Having ignited the great forest fire of diligence,
khorwé gyatso kempar jepa dang
So that the ocean of saṃsāric existence runs dry,
karnak sakpé lé la drang mi chö
The incalculable acts, good and bad, that I’ve amassed
shyen la go kal jé duma chi shing
Will not be apportioned to anybody else.
rang jé tsöncha tamché rang la khor
All the weapons I’ve forged will be deployed against me,
rang gi pungpor nyongwa dön mi za
And I will undoubtedly experience my own comeuppance.
karnak lé kyi drebu manorwa
May I find certainty as to the infallible ripening of actions,
min la luwa mepé ngé nyé shok
The unerring fruition of wholesome and unwholesome acts.

lé ngen sakpé drebu chenpo ni
As the major consequence of accumulated evil deeds,
khorwé né na dukngal gyünché mé
I will suffer uninterruptedly in the realms of saṃsāra.
ngensong sum gyi dukngal zö du mé
The torments of the three lower realms are unbearable.
tori sum gyi dewa gyur né dro
The joys of the higher realms transform and fade away.
künjung gyü kyé dukngal zeb tu tsü
We are trapped within the sufferings that origination brings.
dukngal sum gyi ma khyab dul tsammé
Not even so much as an atom is immune to the three sufferings.
né ngen len gyi gyün tak chöpé chir
In order to interrupt the flow of negative tendencies
tarpé lam tön shenyen tenpar shok
May I follow a guide who shows the way to liberation.

manor lamzang chö kyi nyingkhu ni
May I encounter precious bodhicitta, which is
rinchen changchub sem dang trepar shok
The essence of Dharma, the excellent, unmistaken way.

kyabné lama chok sum drenpa dang
May I recollect the sources of refuge, guru and three supreme jewels,
dé dang mögü lam gyi shyi tsa tsuk
And with faith and devotion, may I establish the foundation of the path.

lamé damngak khokpé nying tar zung
Guarding the guru's instructions like the heart within my chest,
dü nam küntu solwa drakpo deb
May I offer fervent prayer at all times,
palgön lamé jinlab jukpar shok
And may the glorious guru inspire me with blessings.

semchen dinam dak gi drinchen yin
Sentient beings have been so very kind to me:
tokma mé né dak gi pama jé
They have been my parents throughout beginningless time—
kudrin tsemé takpé drinchen ma
Kind mothers, who have treated me with boundless care.
danta dukngal gyatsö long du tsü
Now they are immersed in the ocean of suffering,
dik dang dukngal chusin gyi zung nam
Seized by the sea monsters of misery and misdeeds.
lekpar sam na senpé gokab dral
Thinking about this well, it is impossible to bear;
mik gi chima drak tu trukpa dang
It is enough to make me weep profusely
shé mizöpé jam dang nyingjé gom
And engender overwhelming love and compassion.
rang gi dewa magen nam la jin
All my own happiness I transmit to my old mothers,
denam dukngal gyundré rang la lang
And their suffering, in cause and result, I take upon myself.
lü di yang ni drangmé jin jé né
May I even give away this body of mine countless times
dak tu dzinpé dré chen lakpar shok
And conquer the terrible demon of self-clinging.

nyepa tamché rang dakdzin lé jung
All faults arise from my clinging to a self.
dra lasokpé semchen dé kün ni
All beings including my supposed enemies
ngepar pendok geweshé dang tsung
Are simply teachers offering me assistance.
dra dön gek nang rangnyi trulpa yin
Enemies, demons and obstacles are my own delusion.
nedön tamché gyalwé namtrul dang
Sickness and evil influences are but buddha manifestations,
lha dang dré nam changchub drubpé drok
Gods and demons, assistants of awakening;
lek gu tünkyen dü kyi chotrul yin
Fortune and advantage, the contrivance of māras.
natsa dukngal kyen ngen changchub kyi
May sickness, suffering and adversity
sem chok pelwé tab la jungwar shok
Assist me as I develop supreme bodhicitta.

drawo manor nying la shyukpa yi
The unmistakable enemy is within my heart:
nga dang nga yir dzinpé gong chen di
This great demon of attachment to I and mine.
danta dak gi lamé drin lé tong
Now that I see it, through the guru's kindness,
ngepar khyö mi gawé dukngal nam
I shall certainly take the sufferings that you,
ngé kyi lang né gongpo khyö la jin
O demon, so dislike and give them all to you.
drak nyen jor sok khyö la gawé dzé
Fame, riches and the things that delight you
chik kyang malü trok né khyö kyi ni
I shall steal them all from you without exception
dra ru zungwé semchen dé la jin
And give them away to the beings you revile.
jinpa deshyin ngepar tob gyur chik
May they receive this gift of mine in such a way.

jowo semchen dinam kadrin ché
Noble sentient beings are exceptionally kind.
dinam la ni drok ngen jepa ru
May I never seek to awaken myself if this would
dak ni namyang sangye la mi mön
Make me a bad friend to them,
semchen tsul gyi semchen dönjé shok
But act as an ordinary being for ordinary beings' sake.

nga yi lü di yishyin norbu tar
Let this body of mine become a wish-granting jewel
drowa nam kyi rewa kang jé né
To fulfil the hopes and aspirations of all beings,
denam dzoksang gyé chok tobpa dang
So that they may attain supreme and perfect awakening,
dak gi sem chok ma nyam gongpel shok
And may this supreme mind not decline but further increase.

kaché zöpé gocha rab gö né
Donning the armour of hardship and endurance,
chö nam rangshyin denmé shepa dang
May I realise how all phenomena lack true reality.
rangshyin döndam tong sal gakpamé
And with the supreme vajra mind that has no beginning, middle or end,
tokta üdral sem chok dorjé yi
The unobstructed emptiness and clarity of the ultimate nature,
drib nyi münpa ring du pang jé né
May I banish the darkness of the two kinds of obscuration,
yangdak yeshe nangwa gyepa yi
And with the expansive light of genuine wisdom,
drowé dön la tutob tsalden shok
Have the power and skill to come to beings' aid.

jampal pawö namtar ngön jé né
Realizing the liberational deeds of the heroic Mañjuśrī
changchub chöpé gyatsor shyol shyindu
And immersing myself in oceanic bodhisattva activity
semchen tongpar magyur desi du
For as long as sentient beings remain,
dé yi dön nam rabtu drubpar shok
May I perfectly accomplish their welfare.

sangye gyatso chöpa jepa dang
May I make offerings to an ocean of buddhas,
shyingkham gyatso yongsu jangwa dang
Thoroughly purify an ocean of realms,
semchen gyatso yongsu minpa la
Bring to maturity an ocean of beings,
yeshe gyatso ché la jukpar shok
And access the vast ocean of wisdom.

On the thirteenth day of the eighth month of a snake year, the bodhisattva Lodrö Lungtok Gyatso
Shenpen Drimé Ö made this heartfelt aspiration. May the guru, the buddhas and their heirs
all grant their blessings so that it may be definitively accomplished. Let this alone
come to pass!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "theg chen blo sbyong smon lam nor bu'i snying po/"
in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 12: 273–276